Abstract Conservation areas encompassing elevation gradients are biodiversity hotspots because they contain a wide range of habitat types in a relatively small space.
Studies of biodiversity patterns along elevation gradients, mostly on small mammal or bird species, have documented a peak in diversity at mid elevations.
Here, we report on a field study of medium and large mammals to examine the impact of elevation, habitat type, and gross primary productivity on community structure.
Species richness was observed using a camera trap transect with 219 sites situated across different habitat types from 2329 to 4657 m above the sea level on the western slope of Mt Kenya, the second highest mountain in Africa.
We found that the lowest elevation natural habitats had the highest species richness and relative abundance and that both metrics decreased steadily as elevation increased, paralleling changes in gross primary productivity, and supporting the energy richness hypothesis.
We found no evidence for the mid‐domain effect on species diversity.
The lowest elevation degraded Agro‐Forestry lands adjacent to the National Park had high activity of domestic animals and reduced diversity and abundance of native species.
The biggest difference in community structure was between protected and unprotected areas, followed by more subtle stepwise differences between habitats at different elevations.
Large carnivore species remained relatively consistent but dominant herbivore species shifted along the elevation gradient.
There was some habitat specialization and turnover in species, such that the elevation gradient predicts a high diversity of species, demonstrating the high conservation return for protecting mountain ecosystems for biodiversity conservation.
Of the 239 camera trap deployments, 219 were successful, (20 failures arose due to dead batteries, card errors, obstruction by falling vegetation, and hyena camera damage).
Each deployment location was monitored for approximately 4 weeks before it was recovered and redeployed to the next target site.
The successful deployments with at least 14 camera trap nights resulted in a total of 5756 trap nights in which 28 species of wildlife and four species of domestic livestock were detected, totaling 3018 wildlife observations and 2447 domestic species observations (see Table S1 for raw data and scientific names).
Exact counts and detection rates per species can be found in Table S1.
Within the national park there was a relatively consistent downward trend in wildlife abundance with increasing elevation when considering individual deployments (Figure S1), or averaging within habitat types (Figure S2).
The relative abundance of all native species was negatively correlated with elevation (r = −.68, p = .01) and positively correlated with GPP (r = .91, p = 4.62e‐05, Figure 3).
Outside the park, in the Agro‐Forestry zone, there was a high level of domestic animal activity and low abundance of native species (Figure S2).
Our observations fell within Chao species richness estimates suggesting sampling adequacy over our research period (Figure S5).
This was reinforced by our species accumulation curve that which leveled off at approximately 30 species over our 219 deployments (Figure S5).
Native species richness declined steadily with elevation, and this effect was also explained by habitat type.
Linear and quadratic models that included elevation and habitat performed similarly to models with only elevation (AICc range = 725.7–727.8) suggesting that adding habitat as a covariate only modestly improved model fit (Table 2), over models with elevation or habitat alone (Figure 3).
Given that simpler models should be preferred in the case of similar competing models (Arnold, 2010), we concluded that the best model of species richness and Shannon diversity included only the elevation.
We did not find significant evidence for heightened species richness or Shannon diversity at mid‐elevations, indicated by the lack of a significant negative second‐order polynomial coefficient in quadratic fits (richness p = .06, Shannon's diversity p = .55).
Changes in diversity across the elevational gradient were likely caused by different levels of habitat specificity across mammals (Figure 3).
On one side of the spectrum were the strict habitat specialists, like the steenbok (Raphicerus campestris), that were found in only the Agro‐Forestry zone.
Likewise, the crested porcupine (Hystrix cristata) and the southern tree hyrax (Dendrohyrax arboreus) were only detected in the Montane Forest of the National Park.
Other species, like the suni (Neotragus moschatus), were commonly found in multiple zones, often occurring in high relative abundance in one zone and in moderate and low abundance in adjacent habitats (Figures S3 and S4).
Interestingly, the common duiker (Sylvicapra grimmia) was found in high numbers in both the patchwork of Agro‐Forestry land and the high elevation Ericaceous belt but was only observed once in the denser Montane Forest or Bamboo zones that feel between these two zones, displaying a fidelity to habitats with similar vegetation characteristics.
Finally, many carnivores (Carnivora), including leopard (Panthera pardus), spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta), and zorilla (Ictonyx striatus) were habitat generalists that were detected across multiple habitat types and elevational zones (Figure 4).
Changes in species dominance across habitats and elevations helped us understand shifts in montane mammal communities on Mt Kenya (Figures S3 and S4).
For herbivores, we found unique species combinations dominating each habitat.
Specifically, suni and bushbuck (Tragelaphus scriptus) dominated in the dense vegetation of the lower tropical Montane Forests, blue monkeys (Cercopithecus mitis) and suni dominated in Bamboo, black‐fronted and common duiker dominated the Ericaceous zone, and the rock hyrax was by far the most common animal in the rocky Afro‐Alpine landscapes at the top of the mountain.
Importantly, there are zones that, despite having lower than expected species richness, are critical habitats for certain species and which should be conserved.
The pattern for carnivores was much different; apart from the serval (Leptailurus serval) being most common in the Ericaceous and Afro‐Alpine zones, leopard and spotted hyena were dominant carnivores across most habitats.
Generalist carnivores, especially relatively large carnivores that are able to cover a wider range in search of food resources, appear to be more abundant across the mountain.
Our Sørenson similarity index calculations of wildlife community beta‐diversity show that the wildlife species composition in the agro‐forestry is the most dissimilar from the undisturbed habitats, with various non‐montane species that were only recorded there (Figure 5, exact values in Table S2), such as the four‐toed hedgehog (Atelerix albiventris) and steenbok.
Subdivided by habitat, alpha‐diversity changed from a maximum of 20 species in the more productive Montane Forest to a minimum of 6 species in the low productivity Afro‐Alpine and Rock habitats, centered around high elevation specialists like eland (Taurotragus oryx) and rock hyrax (Figure 6).
This subdivision of habitat also mirrored patterns of elevation where higher elevation habitats had lower mean species richness by camera and lower detected biomass detected per trap night (Figure 6).
Our study represents one of the most comprehensive field‐based investigation of the relationship between elevational change and large (>500 g) mammal communities to date.
We found that species richness and Shannon diversity declined consistently as elevation increased and gross primary productivity decreased with the highest species richness was found in the Montane Forest zone and the lowest in the Afro‐Alpine and Rock habitats which is consistent with Chao species estimates we calculated (Figure S5).
Thus, our results support the energy richness hypothesis (Wright, 1983) but not the mid‐domain effect (Colwell & Lees, 2000) for larger mammals.
Anthropogenic changes strongly affect mammal communities.
We found that a low relative abundance of native mammals in the lowest elevation, which could be related to the negative impacts of human disturbance.
Indeed, on a global scale, human impact is much larger in the lowlands (Nogués‐Bravo et al., 2008).
However, the risks of human disturbance on montane habitats continues to climb elevation worldwide resulting in encroachment zones that threaten to engulf border zones of protected spaces similar to Mt Kenya's Montane Forest (Feng et al., 2023).
The lowest elevation Agro‐Forestry plantations had the second highest species richness among vegetation zones, but showed a low relative abundance of native mammals, presumably due to competition with livestock and hunting.
In the absence of the habitat fragmentation and land conversion of the Agro‐Forestry zone, we would expect similar, if not greater, levels of wildlife species richness and relative abundance with decreasing elevation and increasing GPP, a pattern found not just in mammals but in other clades like herpetofauna (Malonza, 2015).
Due to the wide range of climatic zones surrounding mountains, our results may differ from patterns on other slopes of Mt Kenya.
Specifically, the northern slope features a wider Ericaceous belt but lacks a bamboo or much of a Montane Forest belt due to much drier climate conditions (Allen, 1991; Young, 1984), and the Montane Forest proceeds to much lower elevations on the wetter south‐eastern slope.
The patterns we observed in large mammal species diversity paralleled those in recent research on Africa's highest mountain, Mt Kilimanjaro (Gebert et al., 2019), situated about 400 km south of Mt. Kenya, where large mammal species richness also declined with increasing elevation.
However, carnivores on Mt Kilimanjaro were not detected above 3880 m, whereas we detected several carnivore species (leopard, spotted hyena, slender mongoose (Galerella sanguinea)) beyond 4500 m. Additional differences in mammal communities across the two mountains may be due to increased human presence along the elevational gradient on Mt Kilimanjaro creating niches for some species that may not have been present without human influence (e.g. crested porcupine at 3650 m on Mt Kilimanjaro, but not Mt Kenya) and potentially excluding sensitive species from other elevations (e.g. African buffalo and bushbuck on Mt Kenya, but not Mt Kilimanjaro).
On both mountains, large mammal species richness declined as elevation increased and productivity decreased between 2400 and 4700 m, providing future support for the energy‐richness hypothesis (Srivastava et al., 1998).
Furthermore, the close parallel between relative abundance and productivity does, from our work, lend credence to the many individuals hypothesis (Wright, 1983).
This pattern of declining diversity with increasing elevation contrasts with results from many other studies that found a mid‐domain (middle‐elevation peak) effect (Herzog et al., 2005; Hu et al., 2022; McCain, 2005).
Small mammal surveys conducted on different parts of Mt Kenya (Musila et al., 2019; Onditi et al., 2022) showed that the pattern may vary depending on which side of the mountain was surveyed.
Our results may deviate from the mid‐domain effect, in part, because larger mammals may not be able to specialize on narrow bands of habitat due to their larger space requirements and lower densities compared to small mammals (Beasley & Rhodes, 2010).
Due to their smaller home ranges, small mammals may be more likely to be found in single habitat type resulting in high species richness in a relatively small geographic area (Rickart et al., 2011; Schlinkert et al., 2016) which may partially explain why contemporaneous small mammal studies on other parts of the mountain found some evidence for mid‐domain effects in non‐volant small mammal species richness (Musila et al., 2019; Onditi et al., 2022).
Second, it is possible that large mammal diversity does show a mid‐domain effect, but that it is spread over a larger elevational gradient.
Indeed, the Mt Kilimanjaro study, which focused on elevational ranges from 750 to 4500 m, did find a mid‐domain effect but that the peak diversity was around 2100 m, roughly 200 m lower in elevation than our lowest camera trap (Gebert et al., 2019), a pattern that was similarly observed in a similar elevation study in the Himalayas (Hu et al., 2022).
A study conducted in the Laikipia region, immediately west of Mt Kenya, observed an average large mammal species richness of 48 species in protected landscapes between 1600 and 2100 m elevation (Kinnaird & O'Brien, 2012).
However, the reality that many regions surrounding the lower slopes of mountains are severely impacted by human activity makes it extremely challenging to disentangle mid‐domain effects from the effects of human disturbance.
We observed substantial differences in animal communities in unprotected habitats (Agro‐Forestry) versus adjacent protected Montane Forest habitats administered by the Kenya Wildlife Service.
There are several reasons why wildlife detections were limited in the Agro‐Forestry zone.
Firstly, wild herbivores venturing out of the Montane Forest and into the Agro‐Forestry zone likely face a high degree of resource competition with domestic livestock, supported by our finding that raw livestock detections outnumbered wildlife detections by a margin of four to one.
Additionally, many wildlife species are illegally hunted because they are considered pests (Graham & Ochieng, 2008) or as bushmeat to supplement local farmers' diets (Menz, 2014).
The beta‐diversity analyses showed that the apparently high species diversity of the Agro‐Forestry area is deceptive because the mammal community includes severely reduced abundance of native mammals and large numbers of domestic species.
Some species like common duiker are likely to be found in the Agro‐Forestry belt as a result of the more open habitat created through land clearance and absence of the prime Montane Forest that has historically been at that elevation.
Within the park common duiker were absent from the forested region adjacent to the Agro‐Forestry zone, but were frequently detected in the high elevation open habitat of the Ericaceous zone.
Another open habitat species also found in the Agro‐Forestry zone, the steenbok, whose solitary nature might make them more adept at tolerating human and domestic animal co‐habitation, is noted for having a habitat preference for more arid environments (Du Toit, 1993; Leakey et al., 1999).
Aside from revealing broad elevation patterns in mammal species richness, our study also revealed exciting new records of certain species on the mountain (Figure 7; Table S1).
First, we documented Jackson's mongoose (Bdeogale jacksoni), which had become so rare it disappeared from comprehensive Mt Kenya mammal lists more than three decades ago (Young & Evans, 1993).
We observed Jackson's mongoose on three occasions within a narrow elevational band (2500–2700 m), thus suggesting a previously undocumented surviving population of this IUCN listed “Near Threatened” species (De Luca et al., 2015).
Second, we detected two widespread species known mostly from lower‐elevation drylands: honey badger (Mellivora capensis) and aardvarks (Orycteropus afer), recorded for the first time on Mt Kenya from this study.
Eland were the only large herbivore our cameras detected at elevations higher than 4000 m, the lone survivor of a high mountain mammal community that, as recently as 50 years ago, included elephant (Loxodonta africana), plains zebra (Equus quagga), hartebeest (Alcelaphus buselaphus ), and African buffalo (Syncerus caffer) (Young & Evans, 1993).
Our highest detections of elephants were in the Montane Forest and our highest detections of buffalo were in the Ericaceous zone, hundreds of meters lower in elevation than these species have been recorded previously.
The low number of elephant detections matches speculation within local conservation organizations that elephants numbers across the Mt Kenya habitat region may be decreasing as a result of major historical movement corridors (Meinertzhagen, 1957) being closed due to land use conversion resulting in an a limited ability to reach the mountain from other protected wildlife areas (Nyaligu & Weeks, 2013).
There were also five species that were notably absent in our survey.
Black rhino (Diceros bicornis) and African lion (Panthera leo) have been extirpated from Mt Kenya with the last published sightings in 1983 and 1977 respectively (Young & Evans, 1993).
We did not record endangered African wild dogs (Lycaon pictus), several packs of which were observed as high as 3900 m on the mountain as recently as 1967 (Coe, 1967).
Mountain bongo (Tragelaphus eurycerus isaaci) still survive in the National Park after being nearly hunted to extinction, and are a species of particular interest given ongoing efforts through KWS and private party partnerships to revive the population on Mt Kenya (Kenya Wildlife Service, 2010).
Our camera traps transected ideal habitat (Estes et al., 2008) for all of these species on Mt Kenya but we had zero detections.
However, we recognize that year‐round sampling could reveal different patterns for species like mountain bongo that are known to still exist on some parts of Mt Kenya.
Our data represent the most exhaustive record of large mammal biodiversity on Mt Kenya conducted since at least the first Roosevelt Expedition over a century ago.
From a practical conservation perspective, the changes in community relatedness as it pertains to habitat, where some species exist in large numbers in only one or two habitats and relatively low numbers in the rest, suggests that the whole range of natural habitats must be protected to maintain the total species richness.
This concern is particularly relevant for Mt Kenya, given the combination of both low latitudes and large elevational range (Tenorio et al., 2023).
It is also worth noting that the area of highest species richness abuts the human modified landscape and is most at risk of habitat fragmentation and land use conversion, a combination that has been projected to be troubling for similar montane biodiversity hotspots, which also face pressures of anthropogenic localized disturbance (Feng et al., 2023) as well as climate change (Iturralde‐Pólit et al., 2017; Ye et al., 2018).
Given the expected future climate change in the region (Konecky et al., 2014; Notter et al., 2007; Waititu et al., 2022), we also think this topic will become even more important for evaluating the importance of elevational gradients in protecting biodiversity.
These findings reveal the unique nature of this landscape and emphasizes the need for governmental and NGO conservation organizations to continue their essential work to protecting the mammal communities that exist in these rare Afromontane and Afroalpine habitat systems.