The factors determining gradients of biodiversity are a fundamental yet unresolved topic in ecology.
While diversity gradients have been analysed for numerous single taxa, progress towards general explanatory models has been hampered by limitations in the phylogenetic coverage of past studies.
By parallel sampling of 25 major plant and animal taxa along a 3.7 km elevational gradient on Mt. Kilimanjaro, we quantify cross-taxon consensus in diversity gradients and evaluate predictors of diversity from single taxa to a multi-taxa community level.
While single taxa show complex distribution patterns and respond to different environmental factors, scaling up diversity to the community level leads to an unambiguous support for temperature as the main predictor of species richness in both plants and animals.
Our findings illuminate the influence of taxonomic coverage for models of diversity gradients and point to the importance of temperature for diversification and species coexistence in plant and animal communities.
We detected a variety of elevational patterns in species richness among plant and animal taxa (Fig. 1b).
Approximately half of the plant and animal taxa exhibited monotonic declines in species richness with increasing elevation (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Figs 3–4).
The other half had hump-shaped or more complex (for example, bimodal) distribution patterns.
While the plant censuses were complete and the species richness in each study site was accurate, incomplete sampling, a regular problem in studies of tropical communities1826, could have had biased patterns of elevational diversity in animals (Supplementary Table 1).
Estimates of sample coverage, a measure of sampling completeness27, of most animal taxa were high (mean sample coverage >0.80, s.d.
<0.17) but values in four taxa (in spiders, parasitoid wasps, other aculeate Hymenoptera and moths) were moderate to low (mean sampling coverage: 0.54–0.72, s.d.=0.21–0.38).
This suggested that further sampling could have significantly increased estimates of species richness (Supplementary Table 1).
As sample coverage was significantly positively correlated with elevation in some animal taxa (Collembola, true bugs, bees, other aculeate Hymenoptera; Pearson's product moment correlation, r=0.37–0.85, P<0.05) we checked if incomplete sampling could have biased elevational diversity patterns.
We calculated for all animal taxa estimates of asymptotic species richness with the non-parametric Chao1 index2728 and compared diversity trends to those detected in the observed data.
Patterns of elevational diversity based on estimated asymptotic species richness were highly similar to those derived from the observed data (mean±s.d.
of Pearson's r=0.96±0.09, Supplementary Table 2).
In the next step we quantified the support for different hypotheses to explain species richness data at the level of single taxa using information-theory based multi-model averaging2930.
As potential predictors of diversity we used temperature (in animals: mean annual temperature, MAT; and in plants: mean minimum temperature, MMT31), mean annual precipitation (MAP, water availability hypothesis), net primary productivity (NPP; productivity hypothesis), land area within an elevation belt of 300 m above and below the level of the study sites (area hypothesis), predictions of a mid-domain effect (MDE) resulting from multiple random arrangements of species ranges within the elevation boundaries on Mt. Kilimanjaro (geometric constraints hypothesis) and in case of species richness of animals, plant species richness (PSR, plant diversity hypothesis) (Supplementary Fig. 2).
Species richness was best predicted by sets of variables which differed among the individual taxonomic groups (Table 1 and Supplementary Table 3).
Temperature (MMT and MAT) was an important predictor of species richness in most taxa, having significant positive effects in 11 plant and animal taxa and a negative effect in one taxon.
NPP was significantly correlated to species richness in eight plant and animal groups.
However, positive and negative effects of primary productivity were equally common.
Six taxa exhibited significant positive, and three taxa negative relationships to MAP.
Richness of phylogenetically basal plant lineages (Lycopodiopsida, ferns, conifers) tended to increase, while richness of more modern lineages (for example, monocots) tended to decrease at elevated levels of MAP (Table 1).
Significant positive effects of land area and geometric constraints (that is, the MDE) were only observed in two taxa (millipedes and Orthoptera).
In moths and gastropods, two animal groups with completely or largely herbivorous diet, significant, positive correlations with PSR were detected.
Other animal taxa did not strongly respond to the variation in plant richness.
Enhancing the taxonomic coverage of the data from one to eight (in plants) or 16 taxa (in animals) increased the explained variation of statistical models (that is, of species richness as a function of elevation) and lead to an increasing linearization of elevational species richness patterns in both plants and animals (Fig. 2).
At the full multi-taxa community level (that is, species richness calculated by summing species richness values of all studied plant or animal taxa), species richness declined linearly with elevation in plants and quasi-linearly in animals (Fig. 3) with high levels of explained variation (generalized additive models; plants: explained deviance=77%, estimated degrees of freedom (edf)=1, F=94.4, P<0.001; animals: explained deviance=92%, edf=2.34, F=105, P<0.001).
The decline of biodiversity with elevation was also evident but less pronounced when analysing richness of higher taxonomic levels (Fig. 3b,d): the number of orders and families (the latter only in plants) remained relatively constant up to mid-elevations and strongly declined at higher elevations.
Increasing the taxonomic coverage of the data from single taxa to the multi-taxa community level revealed an increasing importance of MMT and MAT as the main predictors of diversity, while the support for NPP, area and other predictor variables declined (Fig. 4).
At the highest level of taxonomic coverage, MMT and MAT were the only significant predictors of species richness (Table 1), explaining 79 and 94% of the total variation in plant and animal species richness, respectively.
Community level results were highly robust against the exclusion of single or multiple taxa (Fig. 4) and to differences in sampling intensity among taxa (Supplementary Fig. 5).
To document the relationships among predictor variables and to disentangle direct from indirect effects we calculated path models (Fig. 5).
As suggested by analyses along other broad-scale gradients32, precipitation and temperature were strongly linked to the NPP of ecosystems.
The direct effects of temperature on PSR were much stronger than the indirect effects via temperatures' positive influence on NPP.
Similarly, in path analyses including animal species richness as the final endogenous variable, the direct effect of temperature on animal richness was much stronger than the indirect effects mediated via its positive influences on NPP and PSR.
Despite decades of ecological research there is little consensus concerning the determinants of diversity gradients1319.
Our study of species richness patterns of multiple plant and animal taxa along the same environmental gradient on Mt. Kilimanjaro, Tanzania, revealed that there is no general model for explaining diversity gradients across separately analysed taxonomic groups.
Instead, patterns and predictors of elevational diversity appear to be idiosyncratic rather than uniform among taxa as they depend on taxon-specific resource requirements and adaptations to the environment.
However, we found that the importance of potential drivers of diversity depends on the taxonomic coverage of analyses with taxonomic upscaling unambiguously revealing temperature as the single, well-supported predictor of species richness for taxonomically broad communities.
Our results suggest multi-taxa community diversity as a new approach to develop more general models to explain trends in biodiversity: while past studies focused on congruence across different taxonomic groups, a predictor may be seen as having higher generality if it explains trends in diversity for taxonomically more inclusive species communities.
Even though former studies already assessed biodiversity of several plant or animal taxa along the same elevational gradient33343536, our study is unprecedented in terms of taxonomic coverage allowing generalizations and conclusions which could not be achieved with former data sets.
A monotonic decrease of species richness with elevation, as found at the highest level of taxonomic coverage, appears to contrast with former meta-analyses3738 finding unimodal patterns of elevational diversity in a majority of studies.
However, all of the individual studies on animals and many of those on plants reanalysed in meta-analyses are based on taxonomically restricted data sets, that is, these meta-analyses are based on taxonomic groups as used in our single taxa analyses.
Analyses at this taxonomic level revealed also for the Kilimanjaro region a high percentage of unimodal patterns (in 44% of all tested taxa diversity patterns were unimodal).
However, with increasing taxonomic coverage of plant and animal communities, unimodal patterns disappeared and the elevational diversity patterns shifted towards a monotonic decline of richness.
This unification of diversity patterns with increasing taxonomic scale was also observed within some clades, for example, in beetles and Hymenoptera.
Future studies on other mountains and along other environmental gradients will be valuable to proof the generality of our findings in other biogeographic and climatic regions.
Taxonomic groups like birds, ants or terrestrial gastropods strongly differed in their elevational diversity distributions and their species numbers were best predicted by different sets of predictor variables.
In approximately 50% of the taxa temperature was the strongest predictor of species richness, but for the other half other variables appeared to be of higher importance.
This idiosyncratic response of taxa to environmental gradients is best explained by niche conservatism, that is, the tendency of lineages to retain their niches and related ecological traits over evolutionary time20394041, leading to phylogenetic autocorrelation in elevational distributions (Supplementary Fig. 6) and clade-specific species distributions patterns4243 (Fig. 1b).
Strong constraints in the evolution of niche space (and of related traits and resource use) may result in a low fit of diversity to energy variables in narrowly defined taxa611.
However, the fit may increase when extending the taxonomic coverage of communities (Table 1 and Fig. 4).
The integration of multiple taxonomic groups in analyses unequivocally revealed that community level diversity is mainly predicted by temperature.
The increasing importance of temperature on diversity for taxonomically more broadly covered communities was driven by two effects: Even though temperature was neither the most important nor a consistently significant predictor variable across plant and animal taxa, its effect was positive, reaching from subtle to strong, in the majority of taxa (Table 1).
In addition, many of the taxa exhibiting strong positive temperature–diversity relationships (for example, monocots, rosids, asterids; Orthoptera, all groups of aculeate Hymenoptera, birds, moths) were more diverse, contributing more species to the local species communities, than taxa with negative or weak relationships (for example, magnoliids, millipedes, Collembola; but note that there were also exceptions, for example, the diverse group of ground-dwelling beetles).
The largely positive effect of temperature on species richness (Table 1) was independent of differences in sampling intensity among taxa (Supplementary Fig. 5) and contrasts with the heterogeneous effects of other predictor variables: NPP was a well-supported predictor variable only for some single taxa but not for the multi-taxa community44.
This was because positive and negative effects of NPP on species richness were equally common in single-taxa analyses.
Species richness of most taxonomic groups and of the animal and plant communities as a whole was highest in the dry savannah where primary productivity and precipitation is rather low, suggesting that even low levels of primary productivity and temporal aridity do not principally put major limitations to the diversification or species coexistence of plant or animal assemblages as a whole.
High levels of statistical support for the MDE, which is often used to explain unimodal patterns of elevational diversity1516, was rare for single taxa and the support decreased with increasing taxonomic coverage.
The species richness of a large number of taxa peaked at the lowest elevation and, even in taxa exhibiting unimodal distributions of species richness, the highest richness values were not generally observed at the middle of the domain but at variable elevations (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 4).
These observations suggest a limited role of this type of geometric constraints for the elevational distribution of plant or animal diversity on Mt. Kilimanjaro.
However, even though the MDE has often been used to explain patterns of diversity on other mountains which do not extend to the sea level4546, its application to these systems is debated15.
Moreover, recent studies proposed to refine the MDE models by including midpoint attractors, that is, peaks of favourable environmental conditions, in models to improve predictions of diversity gradients47.
The area available to species populations is regarded as a major determinant of local and regional species richness1213.
However, land area was a poor predictor of plant and animal species richness on Mt. Kilimanjaro, where significant positive effects were only found for millipedes and Orthoptera.
PSR received high statistical support as a predictor of animal species richness only in terrestrial gastropods and moths.
Particularly, moths are well known for their specialization on certain food plants which probably facilitates strong associations between herbivore and plant diversity48.
The large support for MMT and MAT as the major predictors of multi-taxa species richness suggests a high importance of temperature-driven mechanisms facilitating the origination and maintenance of biodiversity2449.
While recent studies emphasize the positive effect of temperature on speciation rates25051, the young age of Mt. Kilimanjaro (<2 Mio years) and the fact that the trends were found for diversity estimates taken at local rather than regional spatial scales (study sites of 50 × 50 m) suggest the additional importance of ecological mechanisms, such as positive effects of temperature on rates of negative-density dependence5253 or positive effects on resource exploitation and other biological rates2349.
While species richness data for many different taxonomic groups were assessed and sampling effort for most taxa was high, several species-rich animal groups were not studied and additional sampling would probably yield more species in local communities.
Nonetheless, several points underpin that our results are robust against the inclusion of additional taxonomic groups or increased sampling effort: (i) No taxon considered in this study was included based on an a priori expectation of a certain elevational species richness pattern, and the taxa studied were phylogenetically highly diverse and represent much of the terrestrial plant and animal phylogenetic diversity25 (Fig. 1a).
(ii) The sampling resembled a stratified random sampling approach (first strata: sampling of larger taxa, second strata: sampling of species within taxa), which provides comparative estimates of community level diversity even under incomplete sampling of taxa and species (Supplementary Fig. 7).
(iii) Patterns for all taxonomic groups remained consistent when controlling for differences in sampling completeness (Supplementary Table 2) and analyses restricted to taxa sampled with high effort did not change resulting patterns (Fig. 4).
(iv) Moreover, community-level analyses in which we applied a rarefaction approach to standardize sampling effort across animal taxa lead to the same conclusions regarding the importance of temperature as the major predictor of species richness (Supplementary Fig. 5).
(v) Last, analysing only a fraction of the full data set of taxa unambiguously revealed temperature as the most important predictor of plant and animal species richness in terms of both variable importance and effect strength (Fig. 4).
While our study was extensive in terms of studied taxonomic diversity, it was, however, restricted to a single mountain with a specific geological, climatic and biogeographic context.
For example, patterns of elevational diversity have been shown to depend on the extent of the elevational gradient38.
Even though the lowest elevations studied at Mt. Kilimanjaro form the natural base of the mountain (as the Mt. Kilimanjaro region and most parts of East Africa are situated at high elevations), equatorial mountains extending to the sea level could provide even more extreme environmental gradients and could show distinct elevational patterns.
In addition, our interpretation of the importance of temperature and other predictor variables is based on hypotheses-driven correlative analyses of species distribution data.
It will be highly interesting to evaluate the support for drivers of multi-taxa diversity with both correlative and experimental approaches on other mountains, differing in age, climate, degree of isolation and biogeographic context.
In conclusion, our study revealed that a broad taxonomic coverage in macroecological studies provides new insights into the drivers of broad-scale diversity gradients.
Whereas upscaling from regional to global patterns significantly enhanced the perception of the major drivers of diversity81344, increasing the phylogenetic coverage of studies may be another axis to consider on the way to generalization and causal understanding.
While geometric constraints, area, water and productivity variables were of importance only for predicting richness of few groups of low taxonomic level, temperature gained consistent, increasing support as a main predictor of species richness with increasing taxonomic coverage of communities.
Identifying the ecological and evolutionary mechanisms by which temperature governs the distribution of biodiversity will be of fundamental importance for understanding global gradients of diversity and the long-term consequences of global warming.