Abstract Aim Species differ in their degree of specialization when interacting with other species, with significant consequences for the function and robustness of ecosystems.
In order to better estimate such consequences, we need to improve our understanding of the spatial patterns and drivers of specialization in interaction networks.
Methods Here, we used the extensive environmental gradient of Mt. Kilimanjaro (Tanzania, East Africa) to study patterns and drivers of specialization, and robustness of plant–pollinator interactions against simulated species extinction with standardized sampling methods.
We studied specialization, network robustness and other network indices of 67 quantitative plant–pollinator networks consisting of 268 observational hours and 4,380 plant–pollinator interactions along a 3.4 km elevational gradient.
Using path analysis, we tested whether resource availability, pollinator richness, visitation rates, temperature, and/or area explain average specialization in pollinator communities.
We further linked pollinator specialization to different pollinator taxa, and species traits, that is, proboscis length, body size, and species elevational ranges.
Results We found that specialization decreased with increasing elevation at different levels of biological organization.
Among all variables, mean annual temperature was the best predictor of average specialization in pollinator communities.
Specialization differed between pollinator taxa, but was not related to pollinator traits.
Network robustness against simulated species extinctions of both plants and pollinators was lowest in the most specialized interaction networks, that is, in the lowlands.
Conclusions Our study uncovers patterns in plant–pollinator specialization along elevational gradients.
Mean annual temperature was closely linked to pollinator specialization.
Energetic constraints, caused by short activity timeframes in cold highlands, may force ectothermic species to broaden their dietary spectrum.
Alternatively or in addition, accelerated evolutionary rates might facilitate the establishment of specialization under warm climates.
Despite the mechanisms behind the patterns have yet to be fully resolved, our data suggest that temperature shifts in the course of climate change may destabilize pollination networks by affecting network architecture.
In total, we analyzed 4,380 plant–pollinator interactions (3,757 bee, 196 wasp, and 427 hoverfly interactions).
We identified 141 plant species (123 species, two species complexes, 16 morphospecies), and 187 pollinator species (84 species, 103 morphospecies).
More details on the taxonomic resolution are given in the Appendices S1 (Table S1.4) and S3.
Networks (N = 67) included between 1 and 32 pollinator species and between 1 and 14 plant species.
The relative proportions of bees, hoverflies, and wasps in the pollinating community did not significantly change along the elevational gradient (p > .05).
Matrix size ranged between 2 and 448 (mean: 78.9 ± 85.4), and significantly decreased along the elevational gradient (Table 1).
Dependence asymmetry declined with elevation: In the lowlands, positive values of dependence asymmetry indicated higher dependencies of pollinators on plants, while from an elevation of about 2,730 m a.s.l.
these dependencies, on average, turned around.
Nestedness increased with elevation (Table 1).
LUI, which was negatively correlated with elevation (r = −.57), was in case of one network metric a better predictor variable than elevation (Table 1): Matrix size increased with increasing LUI (t‐value: 6.949, p < .001, R 2 = .61).
The community mean of pollinator and plant specialization (d′), as well as network specialization (H 2′) decreased with elevation (Figure 1a–c, Table 1).
Comparisons with null models indicated that these declines of specialization are not driven by network size or interaction frequencies alone (Table S2.2a).
Also, sensitivity analyses confirmed the robustness of the majority of reported patterns: First, all elevational patterns in network metrics were also statistically significant, when analyzing metric means per study site with linear models (N = 18; Table S2.2b).
Second, significant declines of network and mean pollinator (but not plant) specialization with elevation were not only depending on the inclusion of high elevation sites but also detectable for the more intensively sampled study sites below 2,000 m a.s.l.
(p < .05).
Third, the decline in H2' was also detected when five networks per sites were lumped to one joint network, indicating that the pattern was robust to differences in sampling effort (lm, N = 10, t = −2.631, p < .03).
Finally, the decline of specialization in networks, as well as in pollinator and plant communities, was stable when analyzing only sites with low canopy cover (≤median canopy cover), indicating that vegetation structure did not influence the results (all p < .05).
While the d′ of pollinators on average decreased with elevation the coefficient of variation (CV) of pollinator d' increased (pollinators: t = 4.76, p < .001, R 2 = .27), indicating more variability in the level of specialization in higher elevations.
However, this trend was not detectable for study sites below 2,000 m a.s.l.
(p > .05).
The CV in the plant d' did not significantly change with elevation (t = 1.59, p = .135).
Interestingly, a decline in pollinator specialization was also detected at the intraspecific level as the level of specialization of pollinator species decreased along the temperature gradient, that is, species that showed specialized foraging behavior in warm areas, tended to forage more generally in cooler regions (lmer, df = 39.76, t = 4.746, p < .001).
This trend was also found when restricting analysis to species with proper species name (lmer, df = 57.95, t = 2.76, p = .008).
However, the proportion of explained variance was low in both cases (R 2 = .13 and R 2 = .09, respectively).
Mean annual temperature, pollinator richness, flower richness, and habitat area were significantly related to the drop in the community mean of pollinator specialization, when analyzing these variables in separate linear mixed‐effects models (Table S2.3).
When we added these variables in a joint mixed‐effects model and evaluated the support for the full model and all nested models, models including only MAT or MAT and flower richness received the highest level of support (Table S2.3).
The best path model revealed that MAT was the strongest predictor of the community mean of pollinator specialization (cond.
R 2 = 79%; Figure 2c).
MAT had both a direct positive effect on pollinator specialization, and an indirect positive effect via flower richness, which was weak compared to the direct effect (Figure 2c).
In the best path model, (log‐transformed) flower abundance had a positive effect on flower richness.
We tested a set of competing alternative path combinations and ranked path models according to their AICC values.
A path model that did not include the link from flower richness to pollinator specialization was statistically not distinguishable from the presented model (ΔAICC = 0.05).
Pollinator specialization (d′) was generally higher in Hymenoptera than in Diptera (lme, t = 2.312, p = .043, Figure 3a), but was neither related to species elevational range sizes (Figure 3b), nor to functional traits (glossa lengths: lme, t = 0.406, p = .687; head width: lme, t = 0.305, p = .762).
Network robustness against plant extinction was on average lower than network robustness against pollinator extinction (lme, t = −2.70, p = .008), and both increased with elevation (Figure 4, Table 1).
Among MAT, LUI, H 2′, and nestedness, network specialization (H 2′) was the best predictor of network robustness, with less specialized networks being more robust (lme, n = 62, df = 44, against plant extinction: t = −3.48, p < .001, R 2 = .23; against pollinator extinction: t = −2.94, p = .004, R 2 = .14).
Plant–pollinator networks showed clear broad‐scale patterns along the elevational gradient of Mt. Kilimanjaro, highlighting the importance of ecological and/or evolutionary drivers in structuring species interactions.
Specifically, we found an increase in generalization with elevation on the species (d′ intraspecific), community (community mean of d′), and network level (H 2′).
Similar patterns in the specialization of plant–insect pollinator interactions have been reported from biogeographically independent regions, including the Alps (Hoiss et al., 2015, network level), Colorado Rocky Mountains (Miller‐Struttmann & Galen, 2014, intraspecific and network level), the Andes (Ramos‐Jiliberto et al., 2010, network level), and an island volcano in Tenerife, Canary Islands (Lara‐Romero et al., 2019, network and community level).
Far less consistent are the patterns reported from plant–hummingbird interactions along elevational gradients, which were either more generalized in the highlands (Maglianesi, Blüthgen, Böhning‐Gaese, & Schleuning, 2015), or in the lowlands (Dalsgaard et al., 2018).
Similarly contradicting are the results from meta‐analyses describing specialization patterns along other temperature gradients, that is, latitudinal gradients.
Here, patterns ranged from higher pollinator specialization in higher (Schleuning et al., 2012), or lower latitudes respectively (Trøjelsgaard & Olesen, 2013), to no trend at all (Ollerton & Cranmer, 2002).
In view of the fact that temperature has a big impact on specialization, we suggest that besides the difficulty to standardize studies properly with different sampling strategies for latitudinal meta‐analyses, the dominance of endothermic pollinators (e.g., hummingbirds, bats) toward the tropics might partly explain these discrepancies.
For example, in hummingbirds species richness, contemporary precipitation and quaternary climate change velocity, but not MAT, predicted specialization (Dalsgaard et al., 2011).
Depending on the ratio of endothermic and ectothermic pollinators considered in meta‐analyses, the role of temperature in structuring specialization patterns might become weaker or stronger causing different patterns along latitude.
In our study, we concentrated on three important insect pollinator groups: bees, nonbee aculeates (“wasps”), and hoverflies.
With this we excluded some flower visitors, which are known to contribute to pollination like nonsyrphid Diptera (Orford, Vaughan, & Memmott, 2015).
These Diptera were more abundant in higher than in lower elevations abundant in high than in low elevations.
However, as they are known to be as specialized as syrphid flies (Orford et al., 2015), and, in accordance with syrphid flies, less specialized than Hymenoptera (Benadi, Hovestadt, Poethke, & Blüthgen, 2014, and our results), the exclusion of this group in our analyses unlikely affected the general direction of the reported patterns of specialization.
Along the slopes of Mt. Kilimanjaro, MAT was the best predictor of mean pollinator specialization.
Even within pollinator species, individuals tended to forage more generalized in the cold highlands than in the warm lowlands.
The mechanisms behind the link of temperature and specialization remain elusive.
However, one major hypothesis is that is the increase of metabolic costs in foraging flights under cool temperatures (Kovac et al., 2015; Stabentheiner, Vollmann, Kovac, & Crailsheim, 2003), triggers generalized foraging.
Even within pollinator species, individuals tended to forage more generalized in the highlands than in the lowlands, supporting the concept of energetic constraints.
Long‐tongued bumble bees species also showed comparable shifts in intraspecific foraging behavior in alpine habitats (Miller‐Struttmann & Galen, 2014).
The authors suggested that restricted seasonal lengths drive generalized resource usage of bumble bees in cold habitats, which is plausible in temperate, but not in cold tropical mountain habitats that lack distinct seasonality.
We suggest that in tropical highlands energy‐limitations are caused directly by temperature, as temperature controls the foraging costs for ectothermic pollinators (Kovac et al., 2015; Stabentheiner et al., 2003).
Furthermore, in the alpine and subalpine zone, we observed that foraging of bees was restricted to very few warm and cloud‐free hours of a day, while in the lowlands bee foraging took place all day long.
Alternatively or in parallel, higher evolutionary rates under warm climates might favor the evolution of specialists.
For instance, bumble bee species within the same subgenera have been shown to evolve faster in low elevations than in the highlands (Lin et al., 2019).
This parallels with higher bee richness in the lowlands (Classen et al., 2015; Hoiss et al., 2012) and a higher chance for the evolution of true specialists.
In addition, we detected a potential indirect effect of MAT on specialization via flower richness.
Flower resource diversity, and a sufficient amount of flowers per resource type, might be a premise for pollinator specialization, as specialized pollinators need to acquire enough food.
Against expectations and in contrast to other studies (Dalsgaard et al., 2011; Schleuning et al., 2012), pollinator species richness and visitation rates were poor predictors of pollinator specialization.
This may indicate that physiological and energetic constraints set by temperature rather than the interactions among pollinators (e.g., competitive interactions), shape insect pollinator specialization at Mt. Kilimanjaro.
This is also reflected by a previously reported decline of intraspecific variation in morphological traits of wild bees with increasing elevation (Classen et al., 2017): if reduced competition was the major force shaping these functional traits of bees in high elevations, the opposite pattern, that is, “character release,” would be expected.
Despite the high proportion of explained variance in pollinator specialization in the path model (R 2 cond.
= .79), and even though we verified our results by a set of robustness analyses, it must be considered that our study is based on correlation analyses and that the power of statistical tools to separate variables that are correlated in nature (e.g., area and MAT; pollinator richness and MAT), are restricted.
We also cannot rule out that factors correlating with temperature, which we could not consider in this study, affected specialization.
For example, it is conceivable that pollinator generalization in the highlands coincides with the dominance of plant species with open flowers and short nectar‐holding tubes like, for example, Helichrysum species, which are accessible by more or other, more generalized, pollinator species than tubular flowers.
Additional, more detailed analyses of plant–pollinator interactions and their traits in the field in combination with true experiments will be necessary to verify the results of our correlative study.
We showed that Hymenoptera were on average more specialized than Diptera, which is in agreement with reports from the literature (Benadi et al., 2014; Weiner, Werner, Linsenmair, & Blüthgen, 2011) and which can be explained by the fact that bee larval survival depends on the pollen source (Praz et al., 2008).
Morphological traits were not related to the degree of species specialization, indicating that traits of one trophic level are not informative to predict specialization (Dalsgaard et al., 2018).
Trait matching between trophic levels, in contrast, can sharpen our understanding about how species traits structure species interactions and network architecture (Albrecht et al., 2018; Bender et al., 2018; Dehling et al., 2016).
Interestingly, we found no link between species specialization and species elevational ranges.
Thus, specialized foraging does not necessarily restrict pollinators' ability to inhabit new habitats, which is in line with our finding that even within species the degree of specialization can be adapted to changing abiotic conditions.
Network robustness against pollinator extinction was generally higher than robustness against plant extinction.
This is in line with simulation studies under climate change scenarios (Schleuning et al., 2016).
Importantly, network robustness increased with elevation.
In other words, network sensitivity to species loss was highest where habitat transformation and land use intensification, as main driving forces of species loss are most prevalent (Nogués‐Bravo, Araújo, Romdal, & Rahbek, 2008).
Robustness against species extinction was negatively correlated with network specialization, but not with nestedness, as shown in other studies (Bastolla et al., 2009; Rohr, Saavedra, & Bascompte, 2014).
Network generalization decreases the co‐dependence of interaction partners and is thus an important driver of network robustness.
We assessed robustness against random species extinctions of one trophic level, as we currently had no concrete indication for other extinction orders than random.
Especially in human‐modified landscapes, abundant and well‐connected species are frequent visitors of crops, suffering from pesticide usage, soil cultivation or the bee‐keeping associated spread of pathogens.
They might nowadays face extinction risks that are comparable with the ones of less‐abundant and more specified species.
Alternatively, trait‐based extinction orders can drastically alter the robustness pattern along elevational gradients and related pollination services in unpredictable ways (Larsen, Williams, & Kremen, 2005).
Generally, the robustness metric needs to be handled with care.
First, species may adapt to a certain degree to other interaction partners, when their previous partner goes extinct.
Our finding that specified species from the lowlands tended to forage more generalized in the highlands, points toward such an adaptive capacity, which will relax the co‐dependence of certain species and strengthen network robustness (Kaiser‐Bunbury, Muff, Memmott, Müller, & Caflisch, 2010).
Second, robustness was calculated for networks that derived from short‐term observations.
However, many pollinators show floral fidelity, making observed networks more specialized and thus less robust than networks observed over a longer period (Petanidou et al., 2008; Spiesman & Gratton, 2016).
Finally, this approach ignores that the loss of one species can change the behavior or another species from the same trophic level, with consequences for interaction partners and network stability (Brosi & Briggs, 2013).
Plant–pollinator network architecture strongly responded to changing climate along the slopes of Mt. Kilimanjaro.
We identified MAT as the main driving force for specialization, which in turn affected network robustness against species extinction.
Rising metabolic costs for foraging flights in cool environments might explain the detected decrease of (ectothermic) pollinator specialization in the highlands.
We expect that the temperature‐dependence of metabolic costs affects also the structure of other species interactions including ectothermic organisms (e.g., parasitoid‐host, plant‐herbivores), with consequences for diversity, ecosystem functions and stability (Plowman et al., 2017).
Although the mechanisms behind the temperature—specialization relationship remain speculative, the outstanding role of temperature in structuring plant–pollinator interactions is alarming: global temperatures are predicted to increase by up to 0.7°C in the next two decades (compared to 1985–2005; IPCC, 2013).
So far, climate change was expected to disrupt plant–pollinator interactions by causing spatial and phenological mismatches between interaction partners (Hegland, Nielsen, Lázaro, Bjerknes, & Totland, 2009), or by increased frequency of extreme weather events (Hoiss et al., 2015), with negative consequences for interaction resilience and fitness of plants and pollinators (Forrest, 2015; Schenk, Krauss, & Holzschuh, 2018).
The direct impact of temperature on the specialization of species, which has also been reported from small‐scale climatic gradients for network specialization (Petanidou et al., 2018), imposes additional challenges to species interactions.
The loss of interaction partners may improve pollination quality on small spatial and temporal scales, as less heterospecific pollen will be transported (Brosi, 2016).
This, however, may drastically reduce pollination insurance in the long term (Brosi, 2016).
We conclude that rising temperatures in the course of climate change will destabilize species interactions along entire elevational gradients, thereby exerting additional pressure on species, which already live close to their maximum thermal capacity (Colwell, Brehm, Cardelus, Gilman, & Longino, 2008).